285 Updated Basic Smart Contract Draft (#379)
casper-network/docs: source/docs/casper/dapp-dev-guide/writing-contracts/rust.md

# Writing a Basic Smart Contract in Rust

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

## What is a Smart Contract?

> A smart contract is a self-contained program installed on a blockchain. In the context of a Casper Network, a smart contract consists of contract code installed on [global state](../../../glossary/g#global-state) through the use of a [deploy](../../../design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A smart contract is a self-contained program installed on a blockchain. In the context of a Casper Network, a smart contract consists of contract code installed on chain through the use of a [deploy](../../../design/execution-semantics/#execution-semantics-deploys).
```

The use of the preposition "on global state" seems awkward to me, I think we can say its installed on chain, and that should suffice

Before writing smart contracts on a Casper Network, developers should be familiar with the difference between contract code and session code. Session code executes entirely within the context of the initiating account, while contract code executes within the context of its own state. Any action undertaken by a contract must initiate through an outside call, usually via session code.

## Why Do You Want to Use a Smart Contract?

> Smart contracts exist as means to install programs to global state, thereby allowing disparate users to call the included entry points. These contracts can, in turn, call one another to perform interconnected operations and create more complex programs. The decentralized nature of blockchain technology means that these smart contracts do not suffer from any single point of failure. Even if a Casper node leaves the network, other nodes will continue to allow the contract to operate as intended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contracts exist as stored on-chain logic, thereby allowing disparate users to call the included entry points. These contracts can, in turn, call one another to perform interconnected operations and create more complex programs. The decentralized nature of blockchain technology means that these smart contracts do not suffer from any single point of failure. Even if a Casper node leaves the network, other nodes will continue to allow the contract to operate as intended.
```

So session code is the means through which we install the smart contract, so installation always happens through session code

> Further, the Casper platform allows for upgradeable contracts and implementation through a variety of developer-friendly programming languages. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further, the Casper platform allows for [upgradeable contracts](/dapp-dev-guide/upgrading-contracts/) and implementation through a variety of developer-friendly programming languages. 
```

## Smart Contracts on Casper

Casper smart contracts are programs that run on a Casper Network. They interact with accounts and other contracts through entry points and allow for various triggers, conditions and logic.

> On the Casper platform, developers may write smart contracts in any language that compiles to Wasm binaries. In this tutorial, we will focus specifically on writing a smart contract in the Rust language. The Rust compiler will compile the contract code into Wasm binary. After that, we will send the Wasm binary to a node on a Casper Network through the use of a `put_deploy`. When the node executes the Wasm, it is added to [global state](./glossary/G/#global-state), and [gossips](./design/p2p/#communications-gossiping) that deploy to other nodes. Finally, all nodes within a network will repeat this process.

Author: Changed the text to read

"...After that, we will send the Wasm binary to a node on a Casper Network through the use of a `put_deploy`. Nodes within the network then [gossip deploys](../../../design/p2p/#communications-gossiping), include them within a block and ultimately finalize them. After finalizing, deploys within the block are executed by the network."

A ContractPackage is created through the `new_contract` or `new_locked_contract` methods. Through these methods, the Casper execution engine creates the new contract package automatically and assigns a [`ContractPackageHash`](/dapp-dev-guide/understanding-hash-types#hash-and-key-explanations). The new contract is added to this contract package with a `ContractHash` key. The execution engine stores the new contract within the contract package, alongside any previously installed versions of the contract, if applicable.

> The contract contains required metadata and is primarily identified by its hash known as the contract hash.

Reviewer: Some clarification here, that for a specific version of a contract, there is a `ContractHash`, i.e the hash is primary identifier for that one version. If you need a more "stable" identifier, the Package hash may be a better fit

> A ContractPackage is created through the `new_contract` or `new_locked_contract` methods. Through these methods, the Casper execution engine creates the new contract package automatically and assigns a [`ContractPackageHash`](/dapp-dev-guide/understanding-hash-types#hash-and-key-explanations). The new contract is added to this contract package with a [`ContractHash`](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/struct.ContractHash.html) key. The execution engine stores the new contract within the contract package, alongside any previously installed versions of the contract, if applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ContractPackage is created through the `new_contract` or `new_locked_contract` methods. Through these methods, the Casper execution engine creates the new contract package automatically and assigns a [`ContractPackageHash`](/dapp-dev-guide/understanding-hash-types#hash-and-key-explanations). The new contract is added to this contract package with a [`ContractHash`](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/struct.ContractHash.html) key. The execution engine stores the new contract within the contract package, as the first version within the `ContractPackage`.
```

I would also like to see a line about how contract packages function as containers for contracts themselves. For a contract to exist on chain, the associated package must be created first, and the `new_contract` method is a convenience method, that does the busy work of creating the package first. Currently, I think the sentence structure doesn't necessarily communicate that

## Writing a Basic Smart Contract

As stated, this tutorial covers the process of writing a smart contract in the Rust programming language. Casper maintains a Rust SDK as a first-party entity, while also providing an [SDK Specification](../../dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/introduction.md) for third-parties wishing to develop additional language SDKs.

> This tutorial creates a simple smart contract that allows callers to donate funds to a central purse, as well as track the total funds received and individual contributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial creates a simple smart contract that allows callers to donate funds to a central purse, as well as track the total funds received and the number of individual contributions.
```

Because the contract tracks how many times you've donated, not how much you've donated

> As stated, this tutorial covers the process of writing a smart contract in the Rust programming language. Casper maintains a Rust SDK as a first-party entity, while also providing an [SDK Specification](../../dapp-dev-guide/sdkspec/introduction.md) for third-parties wishing to develop additional language SDKs.

Reviewer: So lets say we provide a contract API here, additionally, we are referring to the JSON-RPC spec instead of the contract API (which would be incorrect). Lets also link to the crates page for people to find the contract API

-------

### Step 1. Creating the Directory Structure

First, create the directory for the new contract. This folder should have two sub-directories named `contract` and `test`.

> - `contract` -  This directory contains the code that becomes the Wasm which is eventually sent to the network.    

Reviewer 2: I suggest removing the period to make the list consistent with the lists below.
```suggestion
- `contract` -  This directory contains the code that becomes the Wasm which is eventually sent to the network
```

Author: Other lists ended up having periods through commit suggestions, so I'm going to leave this period here.

> This tutorial creates a simple smart contract that allows callers to donate funds to a central purse, as well as track the total funds received and the number of individual contributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial creates a simple smart contract that allows callers to donate funds to a purse owned by the contract, as well as track the total funds received and the number of individual contributions.
```

- `test` -  This directory contains all the tests that you will send to the network.

Use the below command to create a new contract folder. This creates the `contract` folder with */src/main.rs* file and *cargo.toml* file

```bash

cargo new [CONTRACT_NAME]

```
--------

### Step 2. Configuring the Main.rs File

> 1) Remove the auto-generated main function and add file configurations 

Reviewer 2: I suggest adding periods for the numbered lists to be consistent with the sub-bullets having periods (which are also lists).

2) Adjust the file attributes to support the Wasm execution environment

- `#![no_main]` - This attribute tells the program not to use the standard main function as its entry point.
- `#![no_std]` - This attribute tells the program not to import the standard libraries.

3) Import the required dependencies

- `contract_api` - This is a command-line tool for creating a Wasm smart contract and tests for use on the Casper network.

> - `typescript` - These are the types shared by many Casper crates for use on the Casper network.

Reviewer 2: Capitalize network?

> Add these dependencies to the *Cargo.toml* file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add these dependencies to the *Cargo.toml* file.
```

```typescript

[dependencies]
// A library for developing Casper network smart contracts.
casper-contract = "1.4.4"
// Types shared by many Casper crates for use on the Casper Network.
casper-types = "1.4.6"

```

> Then, add your imports in the main.rs file along with other imports

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, add your imports in the main.rs file along with other imports.
```

```rust

// This code imports necessary aspects of external crates that we will use in our contract code.

extern crate alloc;

// Importing Rust types.
use alloc::string::{String, ToString};
use alloc::vec;
// Importing aspects of the Casper platform.
use casper_contract::contract_api::storage::dictionary_get;
use casper_contract::contract_api::{runtime, storage, system};
use casper_contract::unwrap_or_revert::UnwrapOrRevert;
// Importing specific Casper types.
use casper_types::account::AccountHash;
use casper_types::contracts::NamedKeys;
use casper_types::{runtime_args, CLType, CLValue, EntryPoint, EntryPointAccess, EntryPointType, EntryPoints, Key, Parameter, ApiError, RuntimeArgs};

```

### Step 3. Defining the Global Constants

After importing the necessary dependencies, you should define the constants that you will use within the contract itself. This includes both entry points and values. The following example outlines the necessary constants for a 

> 

Author: Thanks @GloreenS ! Not sure how the end of this one got cut off, but it's fixed now.

    if let Key::Account(donating_account_hash) = donating_account_key {
        let ledger_seed_uref = *runtime::get_key(LEDGER)
            .unwrap_or_revert_with(FundRaisingError::MissingLedgerSeedURef)
            .as_uref()
            .unwrap_or_revert();
        let donation_count = if let Some(donation_count) =
            storage::dictionary_get::<u64>(ledger_seed_uref, &donating_account_hash.to_string())
                .unwrap_or_revert()
        {
            donation_count
        } else {
            0u64
        };
        runtime::ret(CLValue::from_t(donation_count).unwrap_or_revert())
    } else {
        runtime::revert(FundRaisingError::InvalidKeyVariant)
    }
}

// This entry point returns the total funds raised.
#[no_mangle]
pub extern "C" fn get_funds_raised() {
    let donation_purse = *runtime::get_key(FUNDRAISING_PURSE)
        .unwrap_or_revert_with(FundRaisingError::MissingFundRaisingPurseURef)
        .as_uref()
        .unwrap_or_revert();
    let funds_raised = system::get_purse_balance(donation_purse)
        .unwrap_or_revert();
    runtime::ret(CLValue::from_t(funds_raised).unwrap_or_revert())
}

```

### Step 5. Defining the Call Function

> This is the function that starts the code execution and will be the function responsible for installing the contract. In this case, it also initializes the contract by creating a donation purse and ledger for record keeping.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to rewrite this sentence.
```suggestion
The `call` function starts the code execution and is the function responsible for installing the contract. In this case, it also initializes the contract by creating a donation purse and ledger for record-keeping.
```

> 1) Defining the Runtime Arguments

Reviewer 2: Make the formatting consistent with the above-numbered points. 
```suggestion
1) Define the runtime arguments.
```

> These parameters will be passed in as runtime arguments at the time of installation. Use this pattern of variable definition to collect any type of sentinel values that dictate the behavior of the contract. If the entry point takes in arguments then you must declare those as part of the definition of the entry point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the time of contract installation, pass in parameters as runtime arguments. Use this pattern of variable definition to collect any sentinel values that dictate the behavior of the contract. If the entry point takes in arguments, you must declare those as part of the definition of the entry point.
```

In the donation contract example, the only variable parameter is the `DONATING_ACCOUNT_KEY`.

> 2) Inserting the Entry Points in to the Call Function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2) Insert the function entry points into the `call` function.
```

        CLType::Unit,
        EntryPointAccess::Public,
        EntryPointType::Contract,
    );

    // This establishes the `donate` entry point for callers looking to donate.
    let donate_entry_point = EntryPoint::new(
        ENTRY_POINT_DONATE,
        vec![Parameter::new(DONATING_ACCOUNT_KEY, CLType::Key)],
        CLType::URef,
        EntryPointAccess::Public,
        EntryPointType::Contract,
    );

    // This establishes an entry point called `donation_count` that returns the amount of
    // donations from a specific account.
    let get_donation_count_entry_point = EntryPoint::new(
        ENTRY_POINT_GET_DONATION_COUNT,
        vec![Parameter::new(DONATING_ACCOUNT_KEY, CLType::Key)],
        CLType::U64,
        EntryPointAccess::Public,
        EntryPointType::Contract,
    );

    // This establishes an entry point called `funds_raised` that returns the total amount
    // donated by all participants.
    let funds_raised_entry_point = EntryPoint::new(
        ENTRY_POINT_GET_FUNDS_RAISED,
        vec![],
        CLType::U512,
        EntryPointAccess::Public,
        EntryPointType::Contract,
    );
}

```

The entry point should have the below arguments:

> - `name` - Name of the entry point, this should be the same as the initial definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `name` - Name of the entry point, which should be the same as the initial definition.
```

- `arguments` - A list of runtime arguments declared as part of the definition of the entry point.

- `return type` - CLType that is returned by the entry point. Use type *Unit* for empty return types.

> - `access level` - Accessibility of the entry point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `access level` - Access permissions of the entry point.
```

- `entry point type` - This can be `contract` or `session` code.

> 3) Adding the Entry Points

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3) Add the entry points.
```

> This step adds the individual entry points using `add_entry_point` method to one object and returns it to the `new_contract` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This step adds the individual entry points using the `add_entry_point` method to one object and returns it to the `new_contract` method.
```

```rust

    let mut entry_points = EntryPoints::new();
    entry_points.add_entry_point(init_entry_point);
    entry_points.add_entry_point(donate_entry_point);
    entry_points.add_entry_point(get_donation_count_entry_point);
    entry_points.add_entry_point(funds_raised_entry_point);

```

> 4) Creating the Contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4) Create the contract.
```

> Use the `new_contract` method to create the contract, with its named keys and entry points. This creates the contract object and will save the access_uref and the contract package hash in the context of the caller. The contract package will be created automatically with the contractPackageHash and the contract is added to the package later with the contractHash.

Reviewer 2: Refer to the API when mentioning important methods. Use similar formatting for access_uref and contract package hash. Highlight keywords such as `contractPackageHash`.
```suggestion
Use the [new_contract](https://docs.rs/casper-contract/latest/casper_contract/contract_api/storage/fn.new_contract.html) method to create the contract, with its named keys and entry points. This method creates the contract object and saves the access URef and the contract package hash in the context of the caller. The execution engine automatically creates a contract package and assigns it a `contractPackageHash`. Then, it adds the contract to the package with a `contractHash`.
```

```rust

let (contract_hash, _contract_version) = storage::new_contract(
        entry_points,
        None,
        Some("fundraiser_package_hash".to_string()),
        Some("fundraiser_access_uref".to_string()),
    );

    runtime::put_key("fundraiser_contract_hash", contract_hash.into());
    // Call the init entry point to setup and create the fundraising purse
    // and the ledger to track donations made.
    runtime::call_contract::<()>(contract_hash, ENTRY_POINT_INIT, runtime_args! {})

```

> This section explains the creation of a basic smart contract. Usually, these contracts are upgradable with the ability to add new versions. If you want to prevent any upgrades to a contract, use the `new_locked_contract` method to create the contract inside the call function.

Reviewer 2: Remove this or move it to the beginning of the paragraph.
```suggestion
Usually, these contracts are upgradable with the ability to add new versions. If you want to prevent any upgrades to a contract, use the `new_locked_contract` method to create the contract inside the call function.
```

#### Locked Contracts

> Locked contracts cannot contain other versions in the same contract package, thus, they cannot be upgraded. In this scenario, the Casper execution engine will create a contract package, add a contract to that package and prevent any further upgrades to the contract. Use locked contracts when you need to ensure high security will not require updates to your contract. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Locked contracts cannot contain other versions in the same contract package; thus, they cannot be upgraded. In this scenario, the Casper execution engine will create a contract package, add a contract to that package and prevent any further upgrades to the contract. Use locked contracts when you need to ensure high security and will not require updates to your contract. 
```

```rust

pub fn new_locked_contract(
    entry_points: EntryPoints,
    named_keys: Option<NamedKeys>,
    hash_name: Option<String>,
    uref_name: Option<String>,
) -> (ContractHash, ContractVersion) {
    create_contract(entry_points, named_keys, hash_name, uref_name, true)
}

```

> - `entry_points`: The set of entry points defined inside the smart contract.

Reviewer 2: Use dashes, as above, for consistency.

- `named_keys`: Any named-key pairs for the contract.
- `hash_name`: Contract hash value. Puts contract hash in current context's named keys under `hash_name`. 
- `uref_name`: Access URef value. Puts access_uref in current context's named keys under `uref_name`.

> * The current context is the context of the person who initiated the `call` function. Usually, it will be an account.

Reviewer 3: Is this sentence required here? And it is a different bullet type too.

Author: This is an additional note pertaining to the two previous bullet points, but not of the same information type.

Reviewer 2: I suggest removing the last bullet and adding a note instead.

<img width="847" alt="Screen Shot 2022-04-25 at 7 49 09 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4185994/165145224-7cb4840a-04d4-4448-92a7-ace472743444.png">

> * The current context is the context of the person who initiated the `call` function. Usually, it will be an account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: The current context is the context of the person who initiated the `call` function, usually an account.
```

> 5) Creating the `NamedKeys`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5) Create the `NamedKeys`.
```

## Writing a Basic Smart Contract

As stated, this tutorial covers the process of writing a smart contract in the Rust programming language. Casper provides a [contract API](https://docs.rs/casper-contract/latest/casper_contract/contract_api/index.html) within our [`casper_contract`](https://docs.rs/casper-contract/latest/casper_contract/index.html) crate.

This tutorial creates a simple smart contract that allows callers to donate funds to a purse owned by the contract, as well as track the total funds received and the number of individual contributions.

-------

### Step 1. Creating the Directory Structure

First, create the directory for the new contract. This folder should have two sub-directories named `contract` and `test`.

- `contract` -  This directory contains the code that becomes the Wasm which is eventually sent to the network.    

> - `test` -  This directory contains all the tests that you will send to the network.

Reviewer: This line is incorrect, we don't send tests to the network, the test folder will contain tests that unit test and assert the behavior of the contract matches the developers expectations. It is not necessary for this folder to exist or unit tests to exist, however, given that users pay for the execution, its better to have tests that ensure correct execution

Use the below command to create a new contract folder. This creates the `contract` folder with */src/main.rs* file and *cargo.toml* file

```bash

cargo new [CONTRACT_NAME]

```
--------

### Step 2. Configuring the Main.rs File

1) Remove the auto-generated main function and add file configurations. 

2) Adjust the file attributes to support the Wasm execution environment.

- `#![no_main]` - This attribute tells the program not to use the standard main function as its entry point.
- `#![no_std]` - This attribute tells the program not to import the standard libraries.

3) Import the required dependencies.

> - `contract_api` - This is a command-line tool for creating a Wasm smart contract and tests for use on a Casper network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `casper-contract - A library for developing Casper network smart contracts. This crate contains the API required to author smart contracts
```

```

4) Create the contract.

Use the [new_contract](https://docs.rs/casper-contract/latest/casper_contract/contract_api/storage/fn.new_contract.html) method to create the contract, with its [named keys](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/type.NamedKeys.html) and entry points. This method creates the contract object and saves the access URef and the contract package hash in the context of the caller. The execution engine automatically creates a contract package and assigns it a `contractPackageHash`. Then, it adds the contract to the package with a [`contractHash`](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/struct.ContractHash.html).

```rust

let (contract_hash, _contract_version) = storage::new_contract(
        entry_points,
        None,
        Some("fundraiser_package_hash".to_string()),
        Some("fundraiser_access_uref".to_string()),
    );

    runtime::put_key("fundraiser_contract_hash", contract_hash.into());
    // Call the init entry point to setup and create the fundraising purse
    // and the ledger to track donations made.
    runtime::call_contract::<()>(contract_hash, ENTRY_POINT_INIT, runtime_args! {})

```

> Usually, these contracts are upgradable with the ability to add new [versions](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/type.ContractVersion.html). If you want to prevent any upgrades to a contract, use the `new_locked_contract` method to create the contract inside the call function.

Reviewer: Lets add an additional callout here about the fact that as part of adding contract versions to the package, they need the access URef to the contract package which is done by passing the `Some("fundraiser_access_uref".to_string())` argument to the `new_contract` method

Reviewer: This puts the access URef into the installing account's named keys, ensuring they have persisted the appropriate access rights to the `ContractPackage`

    named_keys: Option<NamedKeys>,
    hash_name: Option<String>,
    uref_name: Option<String>,
) -> (ContractHash, ContractVersion) {
    create_contract(entry_points, named_keys, hash_name, uref_name, true)
}

```

- `entry_points` - The set of entry points defined inside the smart contract.
- `named_keys` - Any [named-key](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/type.NamedKeys.html) pairs for the contract.
- `hash_name` - Contract hash value. Puts [contractHash](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/struct.ContractHash.html) in the current context's named keys under `hash_name`. 
- `uref_name` - Access URef value. Puts access_uref in the current context's named keys under `uref_name`.

**Note**: The current context is the context of the person who initiated the `call` function, usually an account.

5) Create the `NamedKeys`.

You can create [`NamedKeys`](https://docs.rs/casper-types/latest/casper_types/contracts/type.NamedKeys.html) as the last step to store any record or value as needed. Generally, `Contract_Hash` and `Contract_Version` are saved as `NamedKeys`, but you are not limited to these values.

```rust

>     runtime::put_key("toggle_contract_hash", toggle_contract.into());

Reviewer: I believe this section is trying to illustrate an example of creating and passing `NamedKeys`, however, this code sample will just add an entry to the calling context's named keys. So probably best to remove it
